Are right now that we know how it works let's implement it.
I've created a new project and I've added some code in and I've added the imports so I won't have to
tell intelligibly what I want for this implementation.
Each bucket will be an array list and so will start out by creating our buckets so we're going to create
the array that's going to hold the array lists and then we'll create the array lists that will say list
integer and we want an array bucket's equals new list and ologists we just need 10 buckets for the way
that we're going to do the scattering and then will we need to now create the array list at each bucket
so we'll say four in two equals zero I less in bucket Stotland I plus plus buckets equals new array
list and it'll be an integer.
And so we're using array lists as are buckets you could have a linked list here that would be fine.
Now we need to scatter the values in so we're going to traverse the entire Ray and we're going to hash
each value and put it into the appropriate bucket.
So we're in a say four inch equals zero less an input length because we're going to traverse the input
array plus plus.
And we now need a hashing function.
So let's add that.
And this is going to be a more specific version of the of the method that we used in the raid X sort
to return the digit that corresponded to a specific position.
And so we always want the tens digit.
And so you'll recognize this.
And if you don't understand what's happening in here go back and review the video on the rate x sort
implementation because I explain it there.
So I'm going to say private static int hash and we want the sort values so that's going to be an int
and we'll say return value over in 10 modded by 10.
And so what is this doing.
Well the division operator takes precedence over the maade operator.
And so the division will be done first and the result will be modify 10.
So for 54 we'll say 54 over 10 is 5.
And when we mod it by 10 we get 5 because this is probably actually redundant in this case because we
always have 10 and 10 and we were returning an integer so we could probably do that.
And so in the case of 54 54 over 10 is 5.
And so we're going to return five forty six over tennis four.
We're going to return for Extra.
So now that we have a hashing function we can do the scattering phase so we'll say bucket's
hash input.
I don't want input by.
And so what are we doing here while the the index that we want of the bucket that we're going to put
the value into will be at the hashed value.
And so for 54 the hashed value is 5.
And so we want to add it into buckets 5 and buckets 5 is an array list.
And so we have to use the Add method and we want to add 54.
And when we come to 46 Well the have value of 46 is for.
So buckets for in the array list buckets for we're going to add 46.
And so that's what this is doing.
So once we've traversed the entire input array we've scatted our values into the buckets and now we
need to sort each bucket.
And so we're going to say for list bucket buckets and we're just going to use the collections sort method
and sort the bucket now collection starts sort uses an adaptive merge sort.
And so we're going to use a merge sort to sort each bucket.
And so at this point all of our buckets are sorted and the final step is the merge or gathering step
and all we have to do is traverse our buckets array and copy the values from each list because the values
in each of those lists are now sorted.
And so we're going to say and J equals zero.
And we'll say four it equals zero.
I left some buckets start lenth E-plus plus and we'll say for int value buckets J We want a set.
Input J plus plus to the value.
OK so why are we saying here this should actually be bucket's.
I just noticed that typo there.
So what are we doing here.
We're traversing this array the buckets array and so the outer loop is traversing the buckets array
and the inner loop is traversing the array list.
That's at bucket's.
And so we're saying that for each bucket traverse that bucket and copy the values into the input array.
So Jay is tracking where we are in the input array.
And I was tracking where we are in the buckets array.
And so when we come to the bucket that contains 43 and 46.
This loop will first assign 43 to the value and then copy 43 into the input array and increment J and
then it'll assign 46 to the value and then copy 46 into the input array and input J.
And that's it that's bucket sort.
So it's pretty simple.
We create our buckets we scatter the values into the buckets by hashing them.
We then sort every bucket and then we then copy the values in the buckets back into the original array.
Now remember for this to work values in buckets that are in lower positions in the array have to be
smaller than values that are in buckets and higher positions in the array.
So let's run this and we have 43 46 54 66 83 92 and 95 now because we have this is a list it should
be fairly simple to change this to a linked list by just changing this here to a linked list.
Let's let's live dangerously and let's try it.
And so you'll see that that's all we have to do because we we have buckets that are lists.
And so I'm willing to bet that this will just go ahead and work let's run it.
And of course it does so 43 46 54 66 83 92 a 95 and so when you use the parent interface for the type
rather than the specific concrete type.
That's how easy it is to change from one class that implements the interface to the other class.
And so here we're using a linked list for the bucket so using linked list for the buckets.
And if I copy this line here
and I can say here using array lists as the buckets now obviously we can only use one so I'll comment
this out and switch this back to an array list.
So let's run again just to make sure that we're fine and we are.
And so you know that's how easy it is when you're using a parent interface as the type of the buckets
to say well you know what rather than an array less Let's use a linked list and if he wanted to I think
vector implements lists so you could just say you know what let's use vector instead.
So you could go like this.
And there you go.
Then if we run we get the same thing.
So I'll put this back to array list but that's the beauty of
assigning when you create your buckets and whenever you're creating an array or even just a simple variable
of using the parent interface it makes it really easy to switch between implementations.
And so in this video you've seen a an implementation that uses the linked lists for the buckets and
you've seen an implementation that uses an array lists for the buckets which essentially means it's
using an array because we saw that array lists are backed by an array.
All right.
That's it for bucket's sort.
I'll see you in the next video.